James R. Bradley, Director of the Texas
Engineering Extension Service. Today's date is
August 6, 1981. Mr. Bradley, could we begin by your
telling us something about your early years in
Galveston? Well, I was born in Galveston in 1923
and was raised about two blocks from the beach and
lived in Galveston until I was approximately 11 or
12 years old. And when the Depression got my
father's business and he had to go bankrupt, he had
a small farm up in the country in Galveston County,
in the little town of Altaloma. And we moved up
there about in 1932. And I spent the rest of my high
school days in the little town of Altaloma. And
then in 1940, I started . Is that A-L-T-A-L-O-M-A?
Right. A-L-T-A-L-O-M-A. That's in Galveston
County, too. Okay, elaborate more on how your
family was affected by the Depression, please.
Well, my father was a concrete contractor, and he
had built all the warehouses on Broadway and
Galveston, the Kempner warehouses. And when the
Depression hit him in 1929, he continued to stay in
business until he went through all of his
resources. And when he left in 1932, The only thing
that he had was a home in this little town with about
15 acres of land, and that was his total financial
resources. I never felt the Depression myself
because my father always provided for us. And I was
at such an early age, I didn't, and first
generation, my family's first generation in this
country, my mother was born in Glasgow, Scotland,
my father was born in Canada, and of course people
like that don't tell their children problems, and
I didn't even know there was a depression, I didn't
even know there was a problem until after life,
after later on in life, and so I wasn't really
affected by it, that I could, I can look back now and
see the hardships that they went through, but I
didn't see it at the time. How far was it that, was it
when you moved from the big chair? Yeah, we moved
about, we lived on the west end of Galveston and we
moved up to the Galveston counties about 15, 18
miles.
Okay, when did you finish high school? I finished
high school in 1940 and I started A&M in September
1940. Do you remember the famous visit that
President Roosevelt made to Galveston in 1937? I
remember it very vividly and had the opportunity
to shake the President's hand when he was going
down Broadway. And his car waved to him. Tell us
more about that. Well, back those days, we didn't
have a whole lot of entertaining activity. But
whenever the president or the governor would come
to your town or come close to your town, it was a
family outing. And probably more so in my family
than most families, because my parents were both
extremely proud to be American citizens. They had
worked extremely hard, and the United States had
been extremely good to my daddy. and whenever we
had these kind of occasions my daddy did
everything in the world he could to get us exposed
to opportunity to see him or shake their hand or if
they were going to make a speech he made sure we was
there to listen to it and this was not only the
president this was the governor or this was any
high official the day that the president come to
galliviston we were down there bright and early my
mother packed a lunch and we sat in a very good
position was in a very good position when the
president come by and basically because my father
knew several people and we did have good good seats
and I did actually touch President Roosevelt's
hand when he come by in the car. Greatest thrill I
guess I ever had in my life except riding with W.O.
Daniels. At that time, I believe it was the then
Congressman-elect Lyndon Johnson participated
in that meeting. Did you see him also? Yes, I did.
Was that the first time you had seen him? That was
the first time I'd ever seen Lyndon Johnson. But
not the last, I presume. No, it was not the last. No,
I saw him many times. I was with him many times.
Okay, in 1940, you came to A&M in what field? I came
to A&M in 1940, and I was in what they called
Agriculture Administration, which at that time
we did not have a business school. And in the
agriculture administration area, I was majoring
in, you could go either accounting or you could go
marketing and finance. And I selected to go
marketing and finance rather. And you got a
degree? I got, well, my class, I was in the class of
44, and they called our class into the service one
semester before we finished. And I went into the
service in March. March 25, 1943, and we lacked one
semester from graduating. A&M went on a
year-round basis in 42, so even though we hadn't
been here
but seven semesters, because we got that full
semester in summertime, they took us out in 43, and
the university let us take examinations and give
us credit for that semester. I lacked 12 hours from
graduating along with just about everybody in my
class. There were some 1,100 of us. And they took us
off to Fort Sam Houston, and there we went on to
Officer's Candidate School. Those that had
contracts went to Officer's Candidate School,
and I went to Fort Hood. This was the tank
destroyer. We had a former student, a gentleman,
A.D. Bruce, who was father of the tank destroyers.
It was a new component in the Army. And John Bruce
come to A&M, and he recruited 35 of us, to attend
Tank Destroyers OCS, and that's where we went
after we was fully inducted into the Army. And from
the Tank Destroyers School, after graduation, I
stayed in Tank Destroyers as Officer of Kansas
School, taught for six months, taught .30 caliber
machine gun. And then I joined the Line Outfit
692nd Tank Destroyer Battalion, and they were in
the process of getting ready to go overseas. So
shortly after I joined them, 45 days after I joined
them, we went to Fort Mary, Maryland. And from Fort
Mary, Maryland we went to New York and shipped out
for Europe. And we got over there in, oh it was about
in October of 1944.
After the D-Day landing, you landed, where did you
go, France? Yes, we went to France and From France,
we went on into southern Germany. We went into Le
Havre, and then went on down into southern
Germany, and into Stuttgart, across the
Siegfried Line. Your group was serving under
General Eisenhower? Well, yes. He was commander
of all the troops in Europe.
As a tank destroyer battalion, you had one platoon
of tank destroyers assigned to an infantry
battalion. So my battalion commander was never
closer than 60 to 100 miles from me. So I was
attached to, every tank destroyer platoon, I was a
platoon leader, was attached to an infantry
battalion. I was attached to the
103rd Infantry Division, the 9th Battalion of the
103rd Infantry Division. It was commanded by
General Terry Allen. Never did see the man in my
life, but I mean, that was our division commander.
And we were assigned to an infantry battalion. And
I stayed with that infantry battalion right on
through until about,
I guess it was about June of 1945, about a month
after the war. And then they put us into
occupation.
And in the meantime, my platoon, along with the the
45th Infantry Division, which was known as the
Rainbow Division. The last combat we saw was in
Munich. And my last assignment was we were put in to
relieve concentration camp Dachau. And I stayed
about 36 hours in Munich where concentration camp
Dachau was located. Could you spell that?
D-A-C-H-U-A. That was the camp where The police
and the people were starved to death, literally
just starved to death. And there was little big
boxcars of people right outside the
concentration camp. And as soon as we got that
under control, At that time, I was a company
commander. My company commander had his arm cut
off, and I'd been a company commander. And then we
were detailed to go from Concentration Camp
Daukau to Concentration Camp Alok, which was
about 40 miles away. And that was a typhus fever
camp. Everybody in Concentration Camp Alok, and
that's A-L-L-A-C-H, had typhus fever, both men
and women. And it was basically just a wired-in
encampment with little shelter-type cover. I
don't remember the size, but it seemed to me like
now it was probably 20 or 30 acres for the females
and 20 or 30 acres for the males. They were joining
each other. They were joining each other and they
just had a little shelter-like type of cover. And
of course they all had type of fever. They were all
in real bad physical health. And we stayed there
about We stayed there about five to seven days, and
then we went on. So then our
battalion, our attack destroyer battalion, was
brought back together for the first time since
we'd been overseas as a battalion. And we got
together in Rosenheim, Germany. And we stayed in
Rosenheim for about three days, and then each one
of the companies was assigned a town to go into
occupation. And I was assigned the town of
Sohuben. That's S-O-L-H-U-E-B-E-N.
Sohuben, Germany. It was a town of about 10,000 to
12,000 population. And I stayed in occupation
there from about May the 9th to 10th, somewhere
along in there, to about July to August, to about
July the 1st, somewhere along there. Because on
the 4th of July, we were moving i remember fourth of
july we was moving from seoul huben down to austria
it's a little town of coast of austria and it was in
bavaria it was a small town and we stayed there
about three and a half weeks right near to the end of
august and then we was shipped home we shipped to
back to camp lucky strike right out of paris and we
was processed to come home and we sailed We were
three days out at sea when they dropped the first
atomic bomb. When the first atomic bomb was
dropped in Japan, we stayed on. The ship was
stopped until we got further orders. We stayed, it
seemed like, for about 36 hours. Then they barred
us to the Boston port. It took us 17 days to get back.
About two or three days of that we were there.
waiting on instructions on where we should go.
Were the men surprised when the bomb was dropped?
Definitely. Were they not aware that such a thing
was even going to happen? Oh, there's always
rumors. During World War II, every day, you know,
we heard there was a
equipment coming out or they had new some type of
chemical that was going to wipe out all the enemy
but leave us all healthy you know it was constant
this was constant but but yes we was shocked
because that's what we had been hearing about
really that's what all the rumors were about but we
back then as far as I was concerned I was very young
and didn't have a whole lot of imagination and I
couldn't have dreamed of such a thing as an atomic
bomb. I mean, it wasn't even my wildest
imagination that there would be such a weapon that
could destroy the human race, the human body, and
the physical plants as an atomic bomb. I mean, I
couldn't even have dreamed of something in my
wildest imagination. So certainly we were
extremely shocked. Do you think that the dropping
of the bomb shortened the war in the Pacific?
Pardon? Do you think the dropping of the bomb
shortened the war in the Pacific? It stopped the
war. It stopped the war. Do you think that the war
would have continued indefinitely without the
bombs? Well, I'm not going to say indefinitely,
but it would have continued much longer than it
did. The Japanese weren't whipped until we
dropped that bomb. They were slightly bruised,
but they weren't whipped. Well, most of the men
that you served with, did they approve of seeing
this bomb used? I wouldn't know. I wouldn't have
the slightest idea. I was damn well pleased with
it, I'll tell you for sure. And I would say that most
of us was, because back those days, In my company, I
didn't have anybody over probably 24 or 5 years of
age. Most of my people in my company were from 18 to
21 or 2 years of age. There was no young person who
wanted to get killed by somebody they'd never seen
or heard of, so we were damn glad for the water to
stop. They were our enemy. Okay, you came back in
1945 to the Port of Boston. Then you came back to
Galveston. No, uh, well, I didn't get discharged.
I got, they give us 45 days leave. Uh, they called it
R&R, rest and recreation, and I did come home to the
little town of Alcalon today with my folks and
that, and then I didn't get discharged until, uh, I
got discharged on January 13, 1946, and I was on
annual leave until April 2nd, and, uh, April the
7th, because I got married April the 2nd, but I was
on annual leave until April the 7th. And then I
started school, come back and got my 12 hours off
starting in June. Where is your wife from? She's
from Fort Worth. Okay, you came back to A&M in 46 and
finished up the same year. Yes, I finished up in the
summer. I got my 12 hours off and then I stayed on for
one semester of graduate work and left in January
of 47. What did you do your graduate work in? Same
area, agriculture economics. I just went on to
agriculture economics. Okay, then what about
1947? What did you do? At that time, Mobile Oil
Company was, the reason I left, Mobile Oil Company
was starting an executive development training
program, and they recruited three. They
recruited a graduate from RISE. I was recruited
from A&M, and I was recruited from the University
of Oklahoma. And so they put us on a three-year
training program, and it was the first time that
they'd ever had one. It was Magnolia Petroleum
Company at that time. It was the first program I
had, the first executive training program I had.
And during that three years, I was exposed to
everything Magnolia Petroleum Company. That was
their refineries, their gas, their headquarters
office, the whole thing. And then after three
years of that, I was made head of their liquefied
petroleum gas department. What was his name?
Dallas. Dallas. And I stayed there for about two
years. a little less than two years as head of the
department, and then they created this
industrial economics research at Texas A&M
University. And I was contacted with, I'd been
interested in coming to work in this new area at
that time. It was under the Engineering and
Criminal Station. And I come down and interviewed
Dr. Miller, who was the director of the
Engineering and Criminal Station at that time.
What was his first name? Arthur W. Miller. That's
M-E-L-L-O-H. And, uh, interviewed him and it
sounded interesting and I wanted to finish my
graduate work. I just lacked, as well as I
remember, about 14 or 15 hours to get my master's
degree and they gave me an opportunity to work full
time and take a course while I was going to school.
I'd always wanted to finish my degree so I come back
with an understanding that I'd stay until I got my
master's degree and then I'd leave. That was in
1951 and I never left. I went on and got my master's
degree in 1954.
This
engineering extension service was established
in 1948. What was the purpose of the organization
when it was established? Well, the whole system
was established in 1948. The activities, a lot of
the activities in the engineering extension
service had been going on since 1919. Vocational
touch industrial teachers started in 1919. Our
fire school started in 1931. Our supervisor
training division started in 1940. And during the
war years, a lot of the programs, a lot of the
training that was done in your war class was done by
that, at that time, by an organization known as the
Industrial Extension Service. That was the
forerunner of the Engineering Extension
Service. And after the war, the Board of Regents,
at that time it was the Board of Directors, created
the Texas A&M College system. At that time they
turned the Industrial Extension Service into the
Texas Engineering Extension Service along with
the other parts of the system at that time. Now the
purpose of the mandate that we have from the
legislature is to provide vocational technical
training programs on an extension basis to the
citizens of Texas. Now what they mean by that is
this is training basically for the employed
worker. A high percentage, upwards of 85% of all of
our training programs are for the employed
worker. That's to upgrade them so they'll be more
productive and more qualified for promotion. Now
since 1948, there's been quite a change in the
Engineering Extension Service, and it'll be
quite a change in the Engineering Extension
Service the next 20 or 30 years, too. You've got to
change. We stayed a very small organization up
until about 1975. And I didn't join the
Engineering Extension Service until 1973. I
stayed as head of the Industrial Economics
Research Division shortly after I joined the
division. I joined in 51 and in 58 I made head of the
Industrial Economics Research Division. And I
stayed head of that until I become Director of
Continuing Education and Director of
Engineering Extension Service. It was a joint
appointment in 1973. Up until that time, the
university had never had a director of continuing
education. But when we come in with our rudder tire
and all of our continuing education facilities,
Dr. Williams created the position of director of
continuing education. And at the time, the
director of the engineering extension service
was retiring, Mr. Bearden, so he put me as director
of both the office of continuing education and
director of engineering extension service. And I
stayed in that capacity until about 1978, and then
I come full time with the Engineering Extension
Service. But the period from 70, in 1973 we had,
when I came into the organization, we had 72
employees, and we had a $1,700,000 budget. And we
had approximately seven or eight training
divisions. The organization started to grow, and
now we have in excess of 340 employees, and we're
operating at about an $18 million budget. And when
it got to this point, when it got to be about $12
million, $13 million, I come in now. I think it's
important that everyone that ever hears about the
Engineering Extension Service realize that we
only get 8% or 9% of our money from appropriated
services. More than 90% of our operating budget
comes from fees and contracts. So this is a
self-support organization. People that use our
services pay for it. So this is quite different
than when you're on an appropriated, hard-money
type organization. Also, all of our programs are
oriented to the adult citizen. Our average age of
our student would be in excess of 30 years of age.
They're adult students. They come from every type
of background, every type of educational
background, every type of work background that
you could possibly think of. They're sponsored by
their companies in most cases. 95% of our
students, their fees are paid for by the company
they work for. And this type of adult student, if
they don't get the type of training that they think
is going to be helpful to them, they just get up and
walk out. So the type of instructor that we have in
the engineering detention service is a unique
type of individual. First, they have to be highly
qualified. And they're highly qualified because
they're talking to people that's working with
them every day of the week. They've got to be able to
teach. They've got to be a good teacher. They've
got to be able to communicate with this adult
student, which is very difficult to do. And then
the third thing is they've
got to always be well prepared. They've got to have
the latest training aids. They have
well-prepared lesson plans. There's no such
thing in our type of educational program as you
have to take this. We don't have a kind of program
like you have to take, like you have to take English
103 to get a degree. None of our programs they have
to take to get anything. They ain't taking them, so
they'll upgrade themselves. And they're
expensive. So it's just a real... real challenge
to work with this type of student. How expensive is
it to take these courses? We vary. We have all
variations of expenses. We'll go from probably a
high of $575 for a 36-hour course. It all has its
materials to maybe
probably we'll charge as low as $40 for a 20-hour
course in water and wastewater. So it'll go
anywhere from $40 to $575 for anywhere from a 20- to
a 36-hour course. Most of these expenses are paid
by the employer? Yes. The major portion, we have
individuals take them that's not employed, but by
far the largest, well, way up in the 90% would come
from their employer.
About how many instructors do we have? We have
approximately 260, 270 instructors and we have
about 70 or 80 support personnel. Are most of these
instructors employed by trade schools
throughout the state? No, they're all employed by
the Engineering Intentional Service. We have a
full-time staff. That's full-time staff. Where
are these courses taught? All over the state of
Texas. We teach in all 253 of the 254 counties. In
other words, these people are full-time
employees of the Extension Service? That is
correct. Full-time staff. I see. Where are some of
the... I know you have a branch in San Antonio.
Where else do you have branches? We have four
centers. We have four regional centers. We
started in 76 creating centers. We have one center
in San Antonio. We have about eight staff members
assigned down there. We have a center in
Arlington. We have about 20 staff members
assigned in Arlington. We have about... We have
eight or ten staff members out from West Texas and
Florida in our regional center, what we call our
West Texas Regional Strengthening Center. And
we're right now just getting the fourth regional
center off the ground, which we'll be in the
process of fixing. We have two people. In addition
to our centers, we have offices. We have an office
in Houston with about 18 staff members. We have an
office in Huntsville with about eight staff
members.
We have an office in Houston with about 18,
Huntsville with about 8, 8 of 10. We have an office
in Wesley Cole that's got two staff members. We've
got an office in Lubbock with two staff members.
And then in Abilene, we've got about five staff
members in Abilene. Now, the difference between a
center and an office is an office has not been
approved by, it hadn't been presented to the
legislature for approval. The center has
legislative approval. Offices, you don't have to
have legislative approval. However, when an
office becomes big enough, they will go in for a
center. Okay, how many instructing personnel do
you have here on campus? Well, we've got about, the
instructional personnel, probably 120. These
are full-time? All full-time. Everybody in the
engineering service is full-time. We do not use
part-time. Could you give us some examples of some
of the types of courses that are offered? We offer
575 different courses. Just say give me half a
dozen or so. Well, all types of supervisor
training. We do all levels of supervisor training
from the foreman right on up to top management. We
do all types of telephone training from the
installation, teaching installation of the
telephone to the management of a complete
telephone company. operation management. We do
the same thing for our power companies and our
electric power companies. We do everything from
installation right on up to the generating plant.
We go all through the electric power utilities. We
do all types of electronic training, many
computers, all types of electronic training
programs. Marine electronics is a very popular
field for us. Of course, everybody knows about our
fire program. National and international are
known for our fire program. We have probably the
only hands-on training, all has its material
training program in the world, and we go all over
the world to put on our courses, by the way. We go all
over Europe, Spain, and several other places to
put on our oil spill school. We're very heavily
involved in our vocational and industrial
teachers. We train about 80% of all the vocational
and industrial teachers in the state of Texas
teaching the teacher how to teach. It's a six
hours, three hour course. They get academic
credit for it. It's a total of 18 hours. And this is
just teaching the teacher how to teach. Lesson
plans, use of visual aids,
all types of construction equipment. We have just
about every type of piece of equipment that you can
get, heavy equipment.
some 560 more. I can give you a catalog if you'd
like. Yeah, I saw a catalog out in the lobby. Tell us
a little more about the fire school. Well, fire
school is one of the oldest programs we got. It was
legislated, it become under the Texas A&M
University in 1931 by the act of the legislature
and we got our first appropriation in 1931. The
fire school is
started out by just training municipal firemen.
And this was the only fire field that they could get
in live training. And we believe in teaching
people fire training about burning fire. You
don't believe by showing them movies. We believe
they've got to get out there and feel the heat of the
fire, and get the smoke in their eyes, and at least
realize what the danger of it is. We're for fire
prevention. The fire program stayed reasonably
small up until about 1973 and 71, 72, 73
we started industrial fire school, started
industrial training. Right now about probably
80% of our training in the fire program is for the
industrial sector. This is for your refinery,
chemical companies, all your ship companies. We
do an awful lot of training for the marine shipping
industry. We do a lot of training for ports and
things of this nature, offshore drilling and
these kind of things. That program right now is
about at a $4 million level. Their budget this year
will be about $4 million. And about $3,700,000 of
that comes from fees and contracts and basically
from the industrial sector. The only programs
that we do for municipalities is basically for the
volunteer firemen. And we don't charge anything
for that. We've got 12 extension instructors that
don't do anything but go from one volunteer fire
department to another throughout the state of
Texas. Because these are the people, these people
don't get anything for that service. That public
service they provide to citizens of their city,
they get nothing for it. So we don't charge them
anything for their training. However, if they
didn't have volunteer fire departments, the
insurance key rate would go completely out of
existence. Unbelievable. Since they provide
their time free, the legislature gives me an
appropriation, and we provide the training to the
volunteer fire department. So you have them come
here and then you also go to them. Right, we do it
both ways. We have them come here once a year,
basically. Now the local volunteer fire
department sometimes come out here on the weekend
and use our field, but basically we go to their
department. And one week a year we have an annual
municipal fire school here, and we have somewhere
from 2,500 to 3,000 students participating. When
is that held each year? It's held the second week in
July. What about a little more on vocational
agricultural training? We do no vocational
agricultural training. That's done by the
Agriculture Education Department. We don't get
into agriculture
at all. What about welding? We don't get into
welding. The only thing that we do, that's Dunbag
education, the only welding we do in San Antonio,
in our San Antonio training division, we have one
course in welding over there. That's our skill
center, and that's a separate part of the
engineering attention service. It's the only
part that we have. We don't do it anyplace else. We
have what we call the San Antonio training
division. It has some six or seven skills. This is
skill training rather than vocational technical
training. This is skill training. Welding is
taught over there on a very limited basis, and it's
a nine-month program. And the student has to be a
CEDA student, that's a Comprehensive Employment
Training Act student. The government funds the
program totally, pays the student $3, whatever
the minimum wage is, while they're attending
class. And they normally go for about nine months.
Now, we teach them everything. There's more to
teaching welding than just welding. Some of these
people that we have, and lots of them, first you've
got to teach them how to read instructions.
They'll spend a lot of time in what we call
job-related courses, which is how to read
instructions, how to use certain tools, so forth
and so on. But the program over there is a
nine-month program, and welding is one of the
programs, and we have others in business
technology. We've got one in auto electronics.
We've got one in sheet metal. We've got one in radio
and television repair. But we've got some seven
skill type. And they're all long-term paid. And
that's paid for fully by the federal government.
Do you have any figures on how many people in a given
year take courses under the Extension Service
auspices? Oh, yeah. We can tell you specifically.
Last year, and it's important you have a copy of it,
last year we had a little over 50,000 students.
And... This gives you the number of student hours.
We had 1,747,000 student hours. We had 2,094
different classes. This gives you the programs,
classes conducted, hours in session students
enrolled. We can tell you every year, this year,
we're going to be at about 55,000 students. We'll
know around September. Do you have some people who
take more than one course, or most of them just take
one course? Most of them take one course.
Occasionally, you'll find one that'll take more
than one. You'll find some that maybe will take a
telephone course and then two or three years later
if it gets promoted to a supervisor, they'll come
into our supervisor training program.
Basically, they're within one or two areas. Could
you elaborate a little more on the supervisor
training program? Well, the supervisor training
program is just a very, what we call a short course
program. They'll range from 12 hours to 40 hours.
The longest course we have in supervisor training
is 40 hours. Most of them run in the 12 to 18 hour
sections. We have about 10 or 12 different
supervisor courses we start. We can start the man
just before he becomes a foreman. Normally, the
people we work with are the companies that have
identified these people that they will be foremen
or they will be a supervisor. And before they get in
this position, they'll normally enroll them in
our courses to get a little background on what
supervisor training is. And we'll take them.
We've taken the same person from the time he took
the very basic supervisor training, the basic
foreman training course right on through to the
case of Alamo Steel. I think he's vice president of
the company right now, and he's been to every one of
them. But we take them on up. Most cases don't get
that far. Most times they take one or two, and that
ends it. What are some of the companies that hire
the Extension Service to conduct courses for
their employees?
Some of them, Dow Chemical Company, Temple
Industries, Lone Star Gas, Southwestern Bell
Telephone, there's 10,000. I could go on and on and
on. Does other states have an engineering
extension service like Texas has? No, there's not
another engineering extension service in the
United States like the engineering extension
service. There's several engineering extension
services over the state of Texas, but they're
basically related to just, they're very small,
and basically they're related to just a
professional engineer. Well, then Texas is a
pioneer in this concept of an extension service.
It sure is. It sure is. Why do you suppose that this
developed in Texas and not other states? Oh,
basically Texas, I would think, I can't answer
your question specifically, but my opinion is
that Texas was a rural state. Texas didn't have a
great deal of industry in it until the last 10 or 15
years. We have 67 rural electric co-ops. We have 82
little family-owned rural telephone companies.
We have thousands of little communities. And
there was no way that these people could get any
training. The cost would be prohibitive for them
to go send their employees off to training. So I
think the legislature, well I think the Board of
Regents of the Texas Indian University System,
you know, probably had numerous requests for
these types of training programs. We are the land
grant university in the state of Texas and this is a
function of a land grant university. And to these
requests and then one program got started and then
A need would rise out here, and they'd contact us.
And just like we're doing right now, the reason
that we are in many things as we are now is because
the people asked us to do it. They asked us to do it,
and they paid for it. We're in, you know, every day
we're practically opening up a new program area
because there's a need. And people contact us
because they know we have the capability of doing
it. And one thing just leads to another. Now the
state's becoming highly reasonably good
industrialized. There's going to be more and more
of it as the people come into the South. The more
people that come here, the more companies come
here, the more training we're going to have to do.
And we're projecting that the next 10 or 15 years in
our engineering attention service are going to be
high growth years. And it might even extend much
farther than that, but we can foresee that far out.
And one thing led to another. It was a need after the
rural electric co-op's music training, how to
teach a man to climb a pole. And then when we started
doing that, the Texas Department of Corrections
said, well, you know, we've got inmates in here.
We've got a lot of poles in our prison system, so why
don't we send our inmates over there? Well, we do
about a million and a half dollars' worth of
training for the inmates over at the Texas
Department of Corrections. They bring them over
here, and we go over there. If it's a
high-capitalized training program, they'll
bring their people here. If we can do it with a
little bit of capital goods, then we take the
program there. Then you expect this program to
continue to expand through the 80s. What are some
of the ways that you think it will? Well, it's going
to expand the electronic part of our program, the
electronic training division. It's going to have
rapid expansion. The public works training
division, and this is training programs that we
put on for all employees of municipalities and
counties. It's going to expand rapidly. I'm
saying that because people are going to have to
produce more, and the only way they can produce
more is to be better trained. That's the only way
you can increase productivity is get better
trained people, better equipment, better
people. Public works is going to expand rapidly.
The industrial fire school is going to expand
rapidly. We know the oil and hazardous materials
are growing at a very rapid rate, faster than we can
get good people. We're just now getting inland.
All of our training has been for our
water-oriented oil and hazardous material
training. We're now getting inland, and with all
your railroads, Tank trucks, tank cars going
through all these major cities, and the railroad
runs right through the center of every city.
That's going to take a tremendous amount of
training to keep these people trained, because
there are going to be accidents. And right now,
it's void as far as training is concerned. And
we've been in this for about a year, and we can't
even come close to filling the request for our
training programs. That's just for inland.
That's for towns like Every town's got a railroad
going through it. Every town's got a highway going
through it. And every town's got one or the other
and sometimes both. How do you keep your courses
upgraded to meet the changing needs? Well, we try
to keep our instructors on their feet, what I call
on their feet, 40 weeks a year. And that gives them
12 weeks a year for what we call professional
development, course development, annual leave,
sick leave, and so forth. So we try to keep our
instructors out of the classroom at least 12 weeks
a year to let them do this. What about the role of
research in the Extension Service? We do no
research at all. We do program development. I
don't consider that research. We do program
development. We use research organizations. We
use our engineering experiments. They developed
our all-school school. Our all-school school.
The Engineering Experiment Station developed
that whole program for us, and then when they got it
developed, we took it over and implemented it. We
use other organizations that have developed
programs, and we develop our own. We use advisory
committees an awful lot in this organization. In
other words, if a company comes to us and says they
want a program developed in marine electronics,
we'll use that as an example. But we'll go to the
marine industry, and we will get five or six people
together and In this case, Dr. Fife worked with
that committee anywhere from a week to six months
in developing it correctly to make sure it gives
them what they want and what they need. And once
this is developed, then we start conducting it.
There's numerous ways you do program
development.
And as I said, all of our people are, they have to be
outstanding people in their areas of interest,
and they have to keep current. So in doing this, we
do a lot of in-house program development. We don't
call it research. Do most of your teaching
personnel hold master's degrees? No. I would say
it depends on the area of interest. In my... All of
them have this material. Yes, everybody in there
has to have a master's degree or above. In my
telephone program, we don't have any, I don't
think, with a master's degree. Most of them are
just good craftsmen. In our... In our teacher
training program, they're all master's degree
people or above. In our electronic program,
they're all BS degree people or above. In our
public works program, they're all practically
master's degree. We have one or two bachelor's
degrees. You go to our electric landing program,
we've got one person in that division with a
degree, and that's the division head. Maybe two.
We've got two in that division with degrees. The
rest of them are just good craftsmen. And it'll
vary between programs. In our construction
equipment, we have two people with master's
degrees. The rest of them have no degrees. What
about the teacher training section? Could you
elaborate on that? Well, every one of those has to
have a master's degree or above. I mean, as far as
what this section does. Well, that section trains
all the vocational technical teachers in high
schools and community colleges and in companies
as far as anybody that's going to teach. that's
never had a teaching certificate, haven't gone
through the basic courses of teaching in college.
They're good craftsmen. Most cases, they're not
even college graduates. Your vocational
technical teachers in high schools are good
craftsmen, like your carpenter, welder, and all
that. So what we do is try to take the ability that
they have and then teach them how to teach so they
can convey it to the students. We do, I don't know
what percent, it's a high percentage, probably
75% to 90%. Of all the teacher training for high
school teachers in the vocational and industrial
teachers area, and the same thing we did for
Southwestern Bell, any company that's got
training programs, we normally take the people
that's going to do the teaching and give them these
teacher training courses.
That goes for fire departments, police
departments, anybody that's got a training
program.
Is there anything else we need to say before we
conclude? Well, I don't know what you've come to
get, but if I've given you what you want, then I
conclude. If there's anything else you want, let
me know. Well, I don't believe right off hand. I
appreciate you taking the time to talk with me.
Well, I'll be glad to give you any information you
want. And if you want to take the annual report, if
you want to take a course catalog, I think this
makes you perfectly welcome to it. Thank you, Dan.
Thank you very kindly.